My narrative visualization centers around the crisis of guns in America and the fatalities they cause, specifically in the last couple decades. The dataset I’m using contains every single gun death in America from 2006 to 2020 – and each of these deaths has a value for year, month, intent, police involvement, sex, age, race, place, and education level. For the purposes of my own work in this narrative, I’ll be eschewing police involvement and place and focusing on the others to keep things more on track. 

I wouldn’t say there’s a single overarching message from the narrative – there isn’t one fact or diagram I want the reader to come away from the website repeating in their mind. Rather, I’m presenting this narrative as more of a collection of facts – each designed to tell its own unique story in a different way. There’s a theme throughout, particularly echoed in the ‘Time’ slide, that gun deaths in America are increasing over time, but narrowing the entire narrative down to this theme would be oversimplification. Each of the first four slides tells its own story by breaking down the exact same dataset in different ways to get insights into each of those categories. The fifth slide delivers a point based on deaths over the years, and the final set of visualizations is designed to put it all together - it allows you to see the scale of the gun problem along with the categories I’ve already introduced to you. If I had to pick a theme – there is one that echoes in the shadows throughout but can only be seen when looking at the full picture. It’s that the American gun problem is not the fault of a single specific group, no matter the race, sex, or education of someone – the amount of gun deaths present is significant either way. This is especially echoed in the visualization – let’s say you see a group in one of the ‘category’ slides which has a comparatively lower percentage the other groups in that category. You think ‘oh, that group must be doing great when it comes to gun violence’. However, when you look at the visualization – you realize how many dots of that group’s color appear on the screen and think about how even one dot represents the life of an individual – you realize even though other groups have more dots, it’s still too many dots than should be acceptable.  

This narrative was built using the ‘Martini Glass’ structure of using slides in an author-driven order with little exploration and then allowing free-form exploration in the last slide. I was quite torn on which structure to use at first – as I was building my visualization, I envisioned a drill-down type structure where readers could see every gun death in America and then hover over a data point to see the attributes of that specific death. This overview could then be sorted by different categories to reveal trends. When I ran my code for the first time, however, it became clear that due to the massive amounts of data points on screen, hovering over a single one would be impossible. Additionally, there would be little space for annotations. Therefore, I decided to add a bunch of slides beforehand that showcased categories in more detail, with annotations, before the overall visualization. My current narrative follows the martini glass idea as it contains five slides – Intent, Sex, Race, Education, and Time – that are meant to be consumed in order and contain little exploration. The only user exploration in each of these slides is the ability to hover over a data item (like a bar in a bar chart, a section in a pie chart, or a point in a line chart) and be able to see the detailed value of that data item. At the end, though, is the free form exploration section – labeled ‘Visualization’. Here, readers have different choices on whether they want to visualize all the data points by intent, race, sex, or education level, and selecting each of these choices results in a different coloring of the chart. 

Throughout the slides section of my narrative, I largely kept the visual structure consistent. One way I did this was by keeping the buttons at the top of the page – representing different slides – in the same location at the top and also each button has its own individual color that was consistent throughout the slides. More importantly, I made sure the charts looked visually similar throughout the first four slides. This meant a couple things – for once, I made each of these slides contain a bar chart that graphed the number of deaths on one side and the specific category on the other side, and a pie chart which showed what percentage of these deaths each category made up. Along with this, I made sure the position and size of these charts were the same throughout. I also kept a similar color structure throughout – I used orange for the element with the most deaths, blue after that, then green, then red, and then yellow. This is so reading the charts were kept simplified throughout. Additionally, I kept this color ordering in the visualization slide – if a sub-category was a certain color in its category slide – I made sure it was the same color in that category’s visualization so that it would be pretty easy to see how the scaled data of the category slide compared to the visualization. Lastly, across the four visualizations I kept the layout and speed of the visualization essentially the same – the only difference was changing the coloring of the dots. 

When my narrative visualization is first opened, the reader sees an ‘Overview’ slide, which describes the overall structure of the website and how it works. It’s encouraged that the reader moves in order through the slides. After this, the next slide is ‘Intent’, which aims to display overall gun deaths by the intent, or cause of death. On the left, there’s a bar chart which shows the overall deaths for each of the four different intents – which are ‘Suicide’, ‘Homicide’, ‘Accidental’, and ‘Undetermined’. On the right, instead of an overall death count there’s a pie chart which displays the percentage of overall deaths that each intent makes up. I chose to put the intent slide first as it’s the only category slide I look at that isn’t demographic – and it also provides important context on how and why those deaths happen – which is often more important than the demographic information of the people involved in the deaths. The next slide is ‘Sex’, which on the left displays a bar chart showing overall gun-related deaths for males and females – and on the right displays a percentage of overall deaths that each sex makes up. After this comes ‘Race’, where a bar chart displaying the gun-related deaths for each of five races – ‘White’, ‘Black’, ‘Hispanic’, ‘Asian/Pacific Islander’, and ‘Native American/Native Alaskan’ – is shown on the left. On the right, a pie chart is shown with the percentage of overall gun deaths for each race. I chose to group ‘Sex’ and ‘Race’ together because they’re both birth-related demographic attributes that get a lot of focus in media coverage of gun deaths. Next is ‘Education Level’, which has a bar chart on the left showing the gun deaths per the victim’s highest level of education reached – with the different options being ‘HS/GED’, ‘Less than HS’, ‘Some college’, and ‘BA+’. On the right, there’s a pie chart displaying percentages…you get the idea. On the last of our non-visualization slides – we have the ‘Time’ slide, which shows how the number of gun deaths have changed in the United States over the years from 2006 to 2020. The x axis is each year in that time period, and the y axis is the number of gun deaths for that specific year – and these data points are connected by a line making it into a line chart. I chose to put this last because all the previous slides look at aggregated data from the entire time period – which provides important data but a question the reader may end up having after those slides is “Ok, so is this getting better or worse?” – which is unfortunately answered by this slide. Also, I wanted to place it right before the visualizations because this line chart provides important context for the following slides – during the visualizations it may not be exactly clear how many new deaths are being added to the screen per year. Lastly, we have the ‘Visualization’ slides – which contains four options – visualizing by intent, race, sex, or education level. The reader can choose which of these options they would like to visualize by. Clicking one of these buttons results in dots, colored by their category attribute, appearing on screen as time passes (as shown by a ‘Current Date’ field). As the years pass from 2006 to 2020, readers can see every death, represented by a dot, appear on the screen. This is intended to accurately capture the true scale of the gun problem as the amount of dots on screen (each representing a full human life) is staggering. These slides are placed last because readers can absorb the context from the category and time slides before, and now use that information to choose which category they want to dive deeper into. 

For the annotations – I did two main things for each of the pre-visualization slides. The first thing I wanted to do was details on demand that appeared when the user moused over a data item. This could be when a user moused over a bar in a bar chart, a section of a pie chart, or a data point in a line chart. If a user did this, text would appear displaying the category of that data item (the x axis in the bar chart / line chart) along with the exact value of that data item (the y axis in the bar chart / line chart). These two items were labeled and separated by a ‘|’ character. For example, when mousing over the Homicide bar in the Intent slide, text would tell you ‘Cause: Homicide’ and ‘Count: 201468’.  The second value was especially useful as in these charts, trying to determine the exact value based on the axes would’ve been impossible. I found the annotations to be a great addition to the pie chart, where adding a label would’ve been difficult due to the small size of some pie chart sections. Instead, if mousing over the chart section displayed it instead – it would allow the chart to look a lot less crowded. Mousing over a section of the pie chart displays the exact percentage of that section. To make these annotations visually consistent, along with keeping the similar format of ‘Category | Value’, I ensured color consistency throughout different charts. For the bar charts, I made the annotation text match the color of the bar itself, and for the pie charts, I had the text appear white for greater contrast as the annotation was displayed on the chart rather than outside it. This color scheme was consistent throughout the category slides. The second main thing I did was use arrows and text to highlight interesting takeaways and provide useful context about the data in the chart. These annotations wouldn’t be mouseover events – rather they would be on the screen the entire time. I aimed to have at least one of these per chart and tried to ensure that they brought together at least two data items – sometimes even the entire chart as a whole. I used a similar style of arrow that went from the data item I was referencing to the annotation text – this would be two arrows if I was referencing multiple data items in the same text. 

The parameters in most of the slides are simply the slide labels – as picking a different slide among one of the category slides will result in a different chart corresponding to that category appearing on screen. In the visualization section, however, picking a different visualization category changes the coloring of the gun deaths that appear on screen to match that category. Additionally, the visualization is made up of different states – each that represent a different year. A year’s state contains all the data points from that year along with all the data points from previous years back to 2006. As the year parameter changes, the state of the overall visualization changes.

Similar to the parameters, the triggers for most of the slides are simply the slide labels – a readers clicking on them is the catalyst for changing to a different chart category. There is a trigger for annotations with more details in each chart though – it’s when a user mouses over a data item. The visualization labels are similar to the slide labels in clicking on them results in a different visualization category. Changing the visualization label parameter changes the visualization category parameter. The last trigger is a bit different as it doesn’t relate to direct user control. When it comes to changing states of years in the visualization, I have an interval variable defined in my code that changes the year after a certain time passes. In practice, this doesn’t work as well because later years require more time to display the data, so the time taken in practice to change the year exceeds the interval I set as the limitation is now computational power. However, the years eventually do change automatically until they hit 2020. I make sure all these triggers are known to the user by adding descriptions below the header – which I make sure to do in every webpage. These descriptions let the user know how to trigger annotations, how to change slides, and what to do to start the visualization. In the visualization section, to make it even clearer what parameters are being changed and how they impact the data, I have a section with the current date, number of gun deaths in that year, and number of gun deaths since 2006 to that year. These sections help the user understand the visualization better than a bunch of dots appearing on screen with no context would. Additionally, I included a key re-describing which color dots corresponded to which categories for this reason.  
